---
author: Spencer Boucher
date: 2011-09-25
layout: post
summary:
title: Nonlinear
---

If there is one thing I have learned since graduating from college, it is that
life is not linear. I feel that high school, college, and social constructions I
have grown up in had programmed me to conceive of life in a very stepwise,
linear way. Maybe it’s because you are working so single-mindedly toward holding
that diploma in your hand. Or perhaps because you just don’t have much exposure
beyond the people who are doing mostly what you are doing. I could be wrong, but
I think a lot of college kids have this mentality.

But it just isn’t. Or at least it doesn’t have to be if you don’t want it to
be. You can do absolutely anything you want to in this world, and the arena is
HUGE. Like, unimaginably huge. And the Bay Area has to be one of the most
incredible places in the world to make this fact hit home. My new home is a
mecca for so many different cultural movements. Silicon Valley, entrepreneurs,
artists, hippies, LGBT communities, futurists, libertarians, and of course
scientists, the last of which I’d like to think I fall into.

My favorite thing about moving here by far is simply how *interesting* everyone
I meet is. I mean really really fascinating. Maybe I’ve just been somehow
missing how intrinsically awesome the random people I would meet in Tennessee
and Houston were. But here, in a single night you can meet people who work for
Google and Facebook, people who hunt planets for NASA, people crafting all
manner of crazy or thoughtful or brilliant startups, people who have attended
universities all over the country and the world… I could go on and on.

That’s one thing I hope to do with this blog: highlight the amazing people and
projects that I come across. These people are not living linear lives. And just
being in this crazy, fast paced, marvelously jumbled community is creating a
paradigm shift in the way that I see the world. Its tough to explain, but I
guess I’m realizing how things are out there for you to take and affect and
become a part of- *big* things- and all you have to do is try. The rough plan
for this blog is to make it about **ideas**, **adventures**, and
**discoveries**. No promises for how it will turn out developing though.

Here’s to being nonlinear!
