---
author: Spencer Boucher
date: 2011-11-19
layout: post
summary:
title: The new face of education
---

We are on the brink of one of the most radical paradigm shifts to affect human
society in millennia. OK, maybe that that sounds obvious to a lot of people what
with the explosion of innovation that the internet and other new technologies
over the past decade or two. But I’m talking about a total revamping of an
institution that has existed as long as language has existed- indeed, as long as
*we*have existed: education.

Education has barely changed one iota in the last thousand years of its
practice. Plato and Socrates taught their classes essentially the *same way*
that a modern philosophy or science class is taught - hell, we still use the
*Socratic method* in modern classes (this isn’t a claim that the method is
ineffective, merely a demonstration of how long current practices have existed
without drastic change). Dozens of students congregate where the one who has the
knowledge is located, and this one knowledgable person teaches a concept to the
students and answers questions. The only change in the late 1900s was that there
were significantly more places where this happened - called
colleges/universities.

![Oldschool... school]({{ site.url }}/images/plato.jpg)

But colleges/universities were designed in an ancient world. They were built to
spread knowledge in an era of very few knowledgable people relative to the
entire population, when the most efficient way - and indeed the *only*way - of
conducting this transfer of knowledge was face-to-face. This is no longer the
world that we live in. Courtesy of modern technology, we live in a globally
connected world with accessible experts in any field you’d care to study, and I
don’t think that modern institutions of higher learning will survive the
shift. At least not in a state that anywhere near resembles the way they operate
now.

![Exhibit A]({{ site.url }}/images/lecturehall.jpg)

If you want to get an idea of what the new face of eduction will be like, look
to Stanford University, the bleeding edge of the move toward the new system.

This semester, two Stanford-level courses were made available *for free* to
*anyone* with an internet connection: Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
and Machine Learning. These courses were taught by some of the biggest names in
the field. Andrew Ng and his team created the Machine Learning course, which is
the one that I am currently enrolled in, so its the one I’ll talk about.

Over 65,000 students are enrolled (spoiler alert - its *everywhere*). Skimming
the extensive “introductions” section of the class forum reveals that these
students are incredibly diverse, from software engineer professionals working
here in silicon valley to high school students in poor eastern European
communities and absolutely everything in between.

Online courses in and of themselves are not particularly new- institutions such
as [MIT][], [Berkeley][], [Yale][], and many other traditionally well known
schools have been making lectures and course materials available online for
years. The key difference is that this new wave of online courses are designed
specifically and exclusively for the new global audience. This is immediately
apparent in the presentation of the lectures, the format of the homework
assignments, and the design of the curriculum. The result is a learning
experience that I argue rivals that of any traditional college course.

![Example slides]({{ site.url }}/images/forwardpropagation.jpg)

The homework assignments for Ng’s class include quizzes that solidify the
students intuition of the concept, combined with specific programming problem
sets that gives the student a handle on concrete implementation of the ideas
using Octave (a freeware version of MATLAB). As someone who has taken similar
MATLAB courses at a well known private university, I can confidently attest to
the relative efficacy of the new format.

There are differences of course. To clear up misunderstandings that I have, I
used to go to a review session- usually led by a TA- who would try to answer the
questions of dozens of students within a few hours. Now- I simply post a
question to the class forum and have it answered *very*quickly by up to dozens
of knowledgable practitioners- many of whom are already implementing similar
programming techniques in their line of work.

Another significant difference is that instead of 200 different lecturers
teaching the same topic to 65,000 learners, we have 1. This may strike some as a
disadvantage- but in the future, this system will allow the best lecturers to
float to the top. Think about how much more cost effective this is- if we
replace 200 lecturers with 1, we are cutting the costs of education by a factor
of hundreds, not to mention drastically expanding the number of students we can
reach.

Note that in the above point I mention only *lecturers,*not *teachers.*What I
believe we will see is a simultaneous centralization of certain aspects of
education and decentralization of others. In an increasingly connected world,
everyone becomes a teacher. Are you a computer programmer? You are also going to
be a programming teacher. Are you a marketing analyst? Guess what, you are also
going to be a teacher of marketing. In a way that seems contradictory at first-
this consolidation of our currently bloated educational system will provide the
infrastructure necessary to bring back peer-to-peer transfer of knowledge.

Stanford is expanding their open courses next semester, and my prediction is
that it only gets bigger from here.  Below is a list of the next classes to be
offered (still trying to decide which ones I will have the time to participate
in!). I highly recommend them to everyone who is at all interested.

![Course selection]({{ site.url }}/images/course-selection.jpg)

The role of the university will have to change dramatically if and when such a
system becomes the norm. One key role they will have to play lies in
accreditation. (At least for now) students enrolled in these Education2.0
courses do so merely for the knowledge gained. There is no course credit gained
which is a double edged sword. On the one hand, it means students are that much
more collaborative. Cheating becomes a non-issue in such an environment. The key
question becomes how to decide which students are qualified for a given job,
etc. Instead of having accreditation agencies give the seal of approval to other
institutions who then parcel out degrees, we might see a move toward tests or
other processes to directly accreditate individuals.

I could continue to wildly speculate on the issue and I have lots more ideas
about how things might pan out (future blog topics might include how
[Khan Academy][] is turning primary school education on its head, or how studio
schools and apprenticeship systems are on the rise as well). If you disagree or
would like to point out how any of these particular ideas are crazy, leave a
comment! Please! All that I do know is that with tuition prices rising
*outrageously* every year while wonderful free alternative options begin to
proliferate, **something’s gotta give.**

[MIT]: http://ocw.mit.edu

[Berkeley]: http://webcast.berkeley.edu

[Yale]: http://oyc.yale.edu

[Khan Academy]: http://www.khanacademy.org
