---
author: Spencer Boucher
date: 2012-01-06
layout: post
summary:
title: Keeping it real
---

Today I was listening to a Freakonomics podcast about prediction and how
monumentally terrible we are at it- even experts. The segment featured some
small European country that had passed a law to fine or imprison psychics whose
predictions were wrong. Why maintain such strict standards for their predictions
when we don’t hold anyone else similarly accountable. In all honesty I’m not
sure I wouldn’t be in favor of such a law because such psychics are making the
claim that they are delivering a service that they are demonstrably *not*
providing (i.e. *fraud*), but that’s besides the point.

The point is that it got me thinking about accountability for predictions. They
are everywhere, obviously. Pundits, politicians, financial speculators (oh my)…
We have fact checking organizations that (to arguable degrees of success)
provide a way of holding these people to their claims about the past and
present. Obviously we couldn’t rightly hold these people’s predictions to the
same standard that we do (or often don’t) when they are reciting facts, but
***why the hell aren’t we keeping a track record***?

What if every time a president, congressman, political pundit, Fed chairman, or
otherwise high-profile “expert” made a prediction, we entered it into a
database? What if we actually kept statistics on how often there predictions
panned out? Right now all the incentives are stacked to encourage wanton
prediction-making, because we only keep track of the *hits*, and not the
*misses*. Why? Because right now we are effectively letting the people who are
making the predictions be the ones who keep track of their success by *not
calling them out*.

If we switched the incentives around, its a game changer. First, experts become
more careful with their predictions, improving their quality overall (because
face it, right now they are almost always less than worthless). Second, we the
public get an idea of whose predictions are actually worth listening to. I
shudder (and then smile a bit) to think about how many careers would be dashed
upon the rocks if the ability to produce this metric came about.

I picture a website - freely available to all - maybe with individual profiles
for all the would-be Nostradomus. Maybe a staff of statisticians would have to
keep track of all the predictions made, and users could suggest new profiles
they would like to see added and monitored. Picture Mint.com, but predictions
instead of transactions. For example, you could search Glenn Beck’s predictions
by category, by time-frame, or by outcome (yes, no, partial?), and get awesome
graphs and pie charts and a big ‘ole “percentage correct” next to your name.

Thoughts?
